okay we're joined Now by Dr Nick Maynard
he's a consultant surgeon who recently
volunteered for an emergency medical
mission in Gaza with the British charity
Medical Aid for Palestinians he joins me
live from the United Nations
Headquarters thank you so much for your
time on Al jazer you've described your
trip to Gaza back in January as the
single worst experience in your 36
medical career can you tell us what you
saw yes thank you for asking me I've
been going into Gaza for nearly 15 years
and I thought I would be used bit I I'd
be prepared for what I was going to see
when I went into Gaza on boxing day but
what I saw at alaxa hospital was the
single worst series of cases I've ever
seen in my career as a doctor um
appalling clinical situations we found
ourselves in uh great lack of resources
but most of all the most appalling
injuries predominantly on children and
women and and I spent most of the two
weeks operating on severe explosive
injuries to the chest and the abdomen
and the majority of the patients I
operated on were women and I saw some
severely injured children as well yeah
can you expand on that what was the
hardest part of your experience when you
look
back I think seeing some of the
appallingly injured children in
particular I spent some time in the
emergency room at alax hospital as well
and saw some very small children with
terrible Burns
multiple traumatic
amputations um and no real room to deal
with these tragic cases the the
resources were very limited on some days
we had no morphe no strong pain to give
these patients and I remember seeing one
small child who had terrible Burns to
her face so bad that you could see the
bones of her face and she clearly had no
chance of surviving
um and was going to die but we had no
pain relief to give her so Not only was
she certainly going to die but she
couldn't die peacefully she died in
agony uh there was nowhere peaceful for
her to go she was ended up lying on the
floor of the emergency department and
this was one case but we saw multiple
cases like that and they were deeply
deeply tragic I believe you also started
seeing some malnutrition cases back
then
yeah so this was back in sort of around
the new year and we the pediatricians in
alaxa hospital we're seeing two or three
cases of quaia cor which is the most
severe form of protein malnutrition you
see and and it it sort of CED up images
of the famines we sometimes saw in
Africa years ago where where these
potbellied children with with severe
malnutrition and that they were
appearing at alaxa hospital back over
the new year and on the surgical Wards
we saw patients who were malnourished
and there are so many problems with
infections in the hospitals there that
virtually every patient who ends up
having an injury and having surgery gets
a bad infection and of course when
you've got severe infections it
accelerates the process of malnutrition
so we ended up seeing some patients
severely malnourish and of course we've
heard in the last few days about the uh
the the the the the the the man-made
famine should we call it that's now
existing in Gaza and that the
malnutrition problems are getting ever
worse and you have this terrible cycle
of of of sepsis infection malnutrition
and they exacerbate each other so this
is a a profoundly severe Health Care
problem and I think the numbers of
patients we're going to see from these
excess deaths due to n nutrition will
dwarf the figures currently being quoted
for deaths from the trauma of about
30,000 I think we we greatly fear those
figures are going to be well in excess
of 100,000 and as you were saying you
have been visiting Gaza for many years
to teach surgery since 2010 I believe
what did you make of the state of the
medical facilities in this latest
visit uh I mean they're they're they're
grow I mean incredibly challenging I
think even working in the healthc care
section in Gaza in in in quieter times
pre October the 7th were very
challenging so we always have to deal
with lack of resources um often uh
electricity cuts um a and having to make
do with with very limited equipment but
those challenges have been dwarfed by
what we're seeing now um I I spent every
day operating out there we often ran out
of surgical gloves so you had to
sometimes wash gloves between operations
I've mentioned already the lack of
morphine we had many days when there's
no pain relief to give to patients often
no
antibiotics the surgical instruments we
were using were very lacking so we had
to make do with with not so much the
wrong instruments but very different in
in instruments there were sometimes no
blood products on one day we had no
running water in the operating theaters
so we couldn't scrub up properly we had
to use alcohol gel to try and clean our
hands we sometimes had no sterile
dressings we had no sterile drapes for
the patient in the operating theater so
EX extremely challenging circumstances
and of course for the post option of
care they went to Wards which were
appallingly overcrowded often there were
no beds to put the patients in so they
were lying on the floor the health care
the health information system had
completely collapsed so it was extremely
difficult finding patients on the ward
to see how they were the next day so
many patients were were not being
followed up properly so the challenges
were were worse than I could possibly
have imagined and Doctor the Israeli
narrative when it comes to targeting
hospitals is that they are targeting
Hamas operatives who are hiding inside
these hospitals given what you've seen
do you think the damage and the violence
on the people of Gaza in those hospitals
is
Justified not not at all and of course
this is the narrative being pedal by uh
the the Israelis I I have I've been
going to Gaza for many years as you
mentioned I have never seen any Hamas
militans in any hospital I've worked in
um I know shifa Hospital extremely well
I've never seen any Hamas militants
there more importantly during my two
weeks stay at alaxa hospital I I had
access to every single part of the
hospital I visited every part of the
hospital regularly and I've seen no
Hammer militants at all so and and of
course the Israeli Defense Force have
provided no credible evidence to support
those claims perhaps as a final thing to
say about this I I have many friends and
colleagues who are doctors and nurses in
Gaza and I've known them for many many
years I've worked with them they've been
in these hospitals day in day out since
October the 7th I've been talking to
them regularly and quite apart from my
own experiences in alaxa they all report
never having seen any Hamas militants in
any of these Hospitals now of course I
can't comment about what my might be
happening in any tunnels underneath but
certainly I have seen no evidence of any
Hammer military in the hospitals and as
I said I think the evidence being put
forward by the Israelis to support those
claims is not remotely credible Dr Nick
mayard consultant surgeon who recently
volunteered in Gaza many thanks for your
time thank you very much indeed